11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 1/8
Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice
Protecting your organisation’s telephony systems from cyber attacks and telecoms
fraud. 
Note:
All PBX systems should follow the NICC’s Requirements on Communications Providers in
relation to Customer Line Identification display services and other related services
(.pdf).
A Private Branch Exchange (PBX) is a telecommunications system used to
manage and route incoming and outgoing telephone calls within an
organisation. Implementing the steps outlined in this guidance will reduce the
likelihood of attackers compromising your PBX system, whether to commit fraud,
instigate denial of service (DoS) attacks, or exploit telecoms channels.
This guidance is aimed at administrators and/or procurers of PBX systems, so
some knowledge of telecommunications is assumed.
Introduction
As with any system that’s connected to the internet, PBX systems, if not
configured correctly, are at risk of being compromised by attackers. Attackers
can find vulnerabilities by using scanners or by exploiting system weaknesses
such as unchanged default passwords, open SIP ports, or incorrectly managed
(or non-existent) firewalls.
Once inside, criminals can route high-rate international or premium-rate
numbers through the system. These attacks (also known as ‘dial-through fraud’)
are generally prolonged and involve expensive telephone numbers being dialled
hundreds or even thousands of times.
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 2/8
As the PBX owner, you are responsible for the security and administration of your
phone system. Your service provider may have systems in place to help detect
and notify you of hacking attempts and fraud, but as the business owner you will
be expected to pay the bill.
What is a PBX?
A Private Branch Exchange (PBX) is a telecommunications system used to
manage and route incoming and outgoing telephone calls within an
organisation. In essence, a PBX serves as a private internal telephone network
that allows employees to communicate both internally and externally.
Historically, PBX systems were hardware-based systems that required physical
switches and cables to connect calls within an organisation. However, with
advancements in technology, PBX systems have evolved into digital and
software-based solutions that offer a wide range of features beyond basic call
routing. As an essential component of modern business, it is important to protect
and secure the PBX from potential security threats and vulnerabilities.
Types of PBX
There are several types of PBX system, each with its own characteristics and
applications.
Traditional PBX
Hardware-based systems that were commonly used before the rise of digital and IPbased technologies. They manage incoming and outgoing calls within an
organisation using physical hardware components like switches and cables. A
significant cost of installing these switches was the wiring needed to physically
connect each user to the PBX equipment.
IP PBX
Also known as VoIP PBX, IP PBX is a digital PBX system that uses internet protocol (IP) to
transmit voice and data. These systems use the organisation's existing data network
to transmit voice calls as packets of data, allowing for more efficient and costeffective communication. IP PBX systems often offer advanced features like
voicemail-to-email, video conferencing, and integration with other digital
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 3/8
communication tools. These systems can use wifi networks to reduce installation and
maintenance costs.
Hosted/cloud PBX
In a hosted or cloud PBX system, the PBX hardware and software are hosted by a
third-party service provider off site. Organisations connect to the cloud PBX over the
internet, eliminating the need for on-premises equipment. This approach is
particularly attractive to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that want
advanced PBX features without the infrastructure and maintenance costs.
Virtual PBX
Virtual PBX is a software-based PBX solution that runs on virtualised servers. It is a
subset of IP PBX systems and is often used by businesses that prefer not to invest in
physical hardware. Virtual PBX can be deployed on-premises or in the cloud and
offers features similar to traditional PBX systems.
Hybrid PBX
These systems combine elements of both traditional and IP PBX systems. They are
suitable for organisations that want to migrate to IP-based communication gradually,
while still using existing analogue or digital lines.
General mitigations for PBX systems
The NCSC recommend you implement the following security controls for all PBX
systems.
Secure access controls and user authentication
Ensure users understand the importance of strong passwords, and provide
them with assistance if necessary.
Continuously monitor and audit user accounts to identify and disable any
unused or unauthorised accounts.
Many PBX systems feature an administrative interface accessible through a
specific combination of numbers and characters dialled during a call. As
with administrator passwords, it’s essential that you change any default
values that may be in place. You should also implement multi-factor
authentication (MFA) for administrative access.
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 4/8
Limit calls
Limit dialling patterns. Restrict the types of numbers and destinations that
employees can dial to prevent fraud and unauthorised use. For example you
may choose to disable international calling if your company does not make
calls outside the UK.
Disable the ability to call premium rate numbers or personal numbers; these
usually have a high call cost. You may also choose to restrict out-of-hours
calls (i.e. evenings, weekends, or holidays).
Restrict the ability to call forward or call transfer, especially to an off-premise
number. PBXs can be configured to allow calls to be forwarded to a different
number. The most common misuse of this is to route calls to premium rate
or international numbers, but this service can also be abused so that the
final called party sees the Customer Line Identifier (CLI) of the PBX rather
than the scammer who is making the call.
Contracts
Scrutiny of contractual terms is essential to safeguard against potential
pitfalls, such as hidden charges or exorbitant fees. Thoroughly examine the
contract before signing to ensure transparency and protect yourself from
unintended financial consequences.
Ensure your contracts are clear on responsibilities and that these are
covered in the contract. For example, if you have a managed service and a
configuration is exploited, who is responsible for the fraud?
Monitoring and logging
Use network monitoring tools to track call volumes, call patterns, and system
performance. This helps in identifying unusual activity or potential security
breaches.
Store log files securely to help with forensic analysis in case of a security
incident.
Password management
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 5/8
Change default passwords for all on-premises PBX components and
devices. Ensure passwords are strong, if necessary by adopting NCSC
password strategies.
Firewall and intrusion detection/prevention
Use firewalls to control network traffic and prevent unauthorised access to
the PBX system.
PBXs should have inbound/outbound traffic completely locked down to
trusted IPs (that is, those of SIP trunk providers, clients and other trusted IPs).
Where applicable use permit= and deny= lines in the SIP configuration file to
limit IP address access, and prevent easy SIP scanning by setting
alwaysauthreject=yes.
Implement an intrusion detection/prevention system (IDS/IPS) to detect and
respond to suspicious network activities and potential security threats.
Regular updates and patches
Keep the PBX system up to date with the latest security patches and updates
to protect against known vulnerabilities. This includes the software and
firmware running on the PBX itself and for VoIP phone components. Set up
automatic updates where possible.
Encryption
Implement encryption for both data in transit and data at rest within the onpremises PBX system. Use secure transport protocols (TLS) for
communication between PBX components.
Regular backups
Regularly schedule backups of the PBX configuration and data to ensure
data integrity and facilitate disaster recovery in case of hardware failure or
cyber attacks.
Regular security audits and penetration testing
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 6/8
Regularly conduct security audits and assess the PBX system's security
posture to identify vulnerabilities and weaknesses.
Perform penetration tests to simulate potential cyber attacks and address
any identified vulnerabilities.
Disaster recovery planning
Create a comprehensive plan outlining the steps to restore the PBX system
in case of hardware failures, natural disasters, or cyber attacks.
Test and practice your response to a variety of cyber attacks using the
NCSC’s 'Exercise in a Box' tool.
Employee education and awareness
Provide regular security training to employees to educate them about potential
security threats and best practices to follow. Ensure that all relevant employees
know how to recognise and respond to signs of PBX fraud such as:
repeated calls of short duration
high numbers of incoming hung up calls
unexpected increases of incoming calls where the caller hangs up when
answered
the sudden increase of freephone usage or high-cost destinations
long duration calls
changes in after-hours calling patterns
In addition, companies should establish a dedicated and easily accessible
reporting channel to ensure all employees have a clear and confidential way to
voice their concerns.
Specific mitigations for cloud/hosted PBX systems
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 7/8
As with all cloud services, you should choose and assess your provider in line with
our cloud security guidance. In addition, we recommend that you specifically
consider the following security controls for cloud/hosted PBX systems:
Verify that the provider offers automatic updates to keep your system
protected against known vulnerabilities.
Confirm that your cloud/hosted PBX provider employs encryption for data in
transit and data at rest within their system, and implement encryption
protocols like TLS for signalling and SRTP for media streams. This ensures that
voice communications are secure and protected against eavesdropping
and man-in-the-middle attacks.
Specific mitigations for on-premise PBX systems
The NCSC recommend you implement the following security controls for onpremise PBX systems.
Isolate the PBX by placing it on a separate VLAN or subnet to separate it from
other network components. This prevents unauthorised access from other
parts of the network.
It is cheaper and quicker for a supplier to install a PBX ‘straight out of the box’,
with no bespoke configuration. These can leave the bill payer with a service
that can be exploited at their expense. Where possible, stipulate in the
contract that the provider will bear responsibility for any losses resulting
from the exploitation of a misconfiguration in the PBX.
Store backups in a secure, off-site location to prevent data loss due to onpremises disasters. Backups are an essential part of an organisation’s
response and recovery process. See the NCSC guidance on principles for
ransomware-resistant cloud backups
PUBLISHED
20 February 2024
REVIEWED
11/8/24, 10:17 PM Private Branch Exchange (PBX) best practice - NCSC.GOV.UK
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/private-branch-exchange-best-practice 8/8
20 February 2024
VERSION
1.0
WRITTEN FOR
Small & medium sized organisations
Large organisations
Cyber security professionals
Public sector